A Prayer to Lady Yeshe Tsogyal, the Mother
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

ama jomo tsogyal la solwa deb so
To Lady Tsogyal, the mother, I pray.
jetsün dorjé naljormé jingyi lob shik
Venerable Vajrayoginī, inspire me with your blessings!

ma chik kadrinchen la solwa deb so
To the one and only gracious mother, I pray.
dechen yeshe tsogyal gyi jingyi lob shik
Yeshe Tsogyal of great bliss, inspire me with your blessings!

gyalyum dorjé naljorma la solwa deb so
To Vajrayoginī, mother of the victorious ones, I pray.
yingchuk yeshe daki jingyi lob shik
Wisdom ḍākinī, Queen of Space, inspire me with your blessings!

jetsün dorjé pakmo la solwa deb so
To the venerable Vajravārāhī, I pray.
jetsün arya taré jingyi lob shik
Venerable Ārya Tārā, inspire me with your blessings!

dü sum sangye tamché kyi ngowo
Essence of all the buddhas of past, present and future,
ying yum rik ngé namtrul
Emanation of the five consorts of basic space,
khar chen za yi tsogyal
Tsogyal, noble lady of Kharchen,
pakma yangchen trulpa
Emanation of the exalted Sarasvatī,
khyé la solwa deb so
To you I pray!

daki bum dé tsomo
Queen of a hundred thousand ḍākinīs,
gurü tuk kyi zungma
Spiritual consort of the Guru,
sang chen ka yi düpo
Compiler of the great secret teachings,
bö kham kyobpé ama
Mother who protects the land of Tibet,
ma chik drinmo ché la solwa deb so
One and only gracious mother, to you I pray!

gang dul ku yi nangwé
May the appearance of your form that tames as appropriate
dak la jingyi lob shik
Inspire me with blessings!

ma dak tsa yi drawa
May the network of my impure channels
dakpa dorjé kur min
Mature as the pure vajra kāyā,
khyö dang yermé shok chik
And may I become inseparable from you!

dro ong lung gi gyuwa
May the wind energies that move to and fro
dhuti ying su deng né
Merge within the space of the avadhūti1
mi shik nadé sung chok
As the supreme speech of the indestructible nāda.
ngak ni dorjé sung yang
And may the noble lady bring me to maturity as her own form
pakmé rang kur min dzö
With its melodious vajra voice.

poché tiklé tsok nam
May the accumulation of transferring essences
shyomdral dechen kur min
Ripen as the indomitable kāya of great bliss.
dribdral chö kyi ku ru
And may I be brought directly to maturity
ngönsum nyi du min dzö
As the unobstructed dharmakāya.

künshyi drib cha trawé
May the subtle obscurations of the universal ground,
lé lung sok gi yowa
The movements of karmic winds and vital energies,
duldral dorjé namkhar
Be bound, supremely immovable,
mi yo chok tu chingpé
Within immaculate vajra space,
ngowo nyi kyi ku ru
And thus may I reach maturity as the svabhāvikakāya
min né dön nyi lhündrub
Who spontaneously accomplishes the twofold benefit.

rigdzin dhaki tsomo
Queen of knowledge-holding ḍākinīs
demchok heruka pal
And glorious heruka Supreme Bliss—2
detong gyumé gar gyi
May your illusory play of bliss and emptiness
sa sum küntu khyab ching
Pervade everywhere throughout the three worlds,
namkhar jisi bardu
And your infinite emanations
trulpa pak tu mepé
Accomplish the twofold benefit of beings
drowé dön nyi drubpar
For as long as space itself endures.

ama tukjé chen gyi
To this end, compassionate mother,
khyentsé lok tar gyurwé
Look upon me benevolently
dak la tukjé zik né
With your lightning-like love and wisdom,
kalden drubpo tsé dir
And inspire this fortunate practitioner
chimé rigdzin nyepa
To attain deathlessness within this very lifetime.

yumchen khyö kyi jin gyi rang lob shik
Great mother, inspire me with your blessings.
ma chik kadrinchen khyö khyen no
One and only gracious mother, care for me!

Pema Yeshe Dorje wrote this on the ninth day of the monkey month3 in the Fire Dog year (1946).

| Translated (provisionally) by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation
and Tertön Sogyal Trust, 2021.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. “A ma jo mo mtsho rgyal gyi gsol 'debs/" in ’Jam dbyangs
chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol.
3: 71–72
↑ The central channel.
↑ i.e., Saṃvara
↑ i.e., the seventh month.