The Tambura’s1 Yearning Song of Devotion
A Prayer Summarizing Khandro Yeshé Tsogyal’s Life and Liberation
by Jamgön Kongtrul Lodrö Thayé

Namo Guru Jñāna Ḍākinyai!
Homage to the Guru, the Wisdom Ḍākinī!

kuntuzangmo sherab parol chin
Samantabhadrī, Unchanging Goodness, Prajñāpāramitā, Perfection of Wisdom,
yingchuk gyalyum dorjé naljorma
Dhātviśvarī, Mother of All Encompassing Space, Vajrayoginī,
yangchen lhamo yeshe tsogyal shyab
Sarasvatī, Goddess of Learning, Yeshé Tsogyal, Wisdom Queen of the Lake,
lama ku sum khandror solwa deb
Ḍākinī inseparable from the Guru’s three kāyas: to you, we pray!

chö pak drung du mönlam chenpo teb
Before Dharmodgata,2 you made great aspirations;
tubpé chen ngar gang gé lhamor trul
Before the Sage, you manifested as Gaṅgādevī;3
dakpé shying du pakma yangchenmé
In the pure realms,4 you took the form
ku yi köpar ten la solwa deb
Of the exalted goddess Sarasvatī: to you, we pray!

gangchen dulja dulwé dü bab tsé
When the time had come to tame the beings of Tibet,
kha lé tabshé yikdrü nampa yi
You descended from the sky, as means and wisdom united.5
drak yul khar chen rik kyi lhum su shyuk
In Drak, you entered the womb of a Kharchen maid
tezang pakmé nang la solwa deb
And manifested countless auspicious signs: to you, we pray!

ja lo treldé tsé chü nyishar dü
You were born in the bird year, on the tenth of the monkey month, at sunrise.
ku tam tsé na sayö drukdra dir
The earth shook and thunder filled the sky,
metok charbab la yi tsomo gyé
Flowers fell like rain, the lake overflowed,
ja ögur chen pub la solwa deb
And huge canopies of light streamed across the sky in rainbows: to you, we pray!

tam ma tak né yangsal tsikché sung
At birth, you uttered the alphabet and recited lines of poetry.
kha lé lhamo mangpö shipa jö
The sky rang with the sound of goddesses singing verses of auspiciousness.
dawa chik né lo gyé natsö dzok
After just one month you looked like an eight-year-old child,
gyalkham nyenpé khyab la solwa deb
And your fame spread across the kingdom: to you, we pray!

khorwé tsönrar ngejung shuk drakpö
Developing renunciation for saṃsāra’s prison,
gyaltren longwa po lé ring du drö
You fled far from the suitors of surrounding kingdoms,
ngadak trisong tuk kyi shyepa tar
And, aligning yourself with King Tri Songdetsen,
khab kyi dampar jön la solwa deb
You entered his noble court: to you, we pray!

dri lok rigpé né chen nga lasok
Reading, writing, the five major sciences6–
khepé da ten tsam gyi tuk su chü
A few signs by the teachers, and you understood everything.
ngön jang letro chö la sepa yi
Your previous karma sparked your interest in the Dharma,
chö kyi nyer dzin dzé la solwa deb
And you became spiritual advisor to the king: to you, we pray!

lobpön pejung chimpur shyukpa nyi
While you, the master Padmākara, were residing at Chimpu,7
gyalpö chendrang gyalsi mandal pul
The king invited you to court and offered his kingdom as a maṇḍala.
tsolmé tekpa nangwar soltab pé
When he asked you to teach the effortless yāna,8
sang ngak könpar ten la solwa deb
You demonstrated the rarity of Secret Mantra:9 to you, we pray!

lar yang tsogyal dé tün damdzé kyi
Again, Padmākara, you were offered a grand feast10 with the appropriate samaya substances and
also the lady Tsogyal.
tsokkhor pulwé gyé shyin nangwa tsal
With joy, you accepted the king’s request to teach,
jomor ngasol wang gi gyü min dzé
Took Yeshé Tsogyal as consort, and granted her empowerments,
chimpur sang chö shek la solwa deb
Returning together to Chimpu for secret practices: to you, we pray!11

denö sum sok tekpa chechung gi
Having trained in the Dharma of cause and result,
drangdön gyundré chö la lo jang shing
In the three collections — the Dharma of scripture,12 and the provisional meaning of the twofold
vehicle,13
yangchen shyalzik mi jé zung chok tob
You met Sarasvatī, the Goddess of Learning, face to face, she gave you the supreme siddhi of
perfect recall,
ngönshé dzutrul nyé la solwa deb
And so you gained clairvoyance and magical powers: to you, we pray!

drubja tsuk tub sheja khong trol ching
Able to accomplish whatever was needed, mastering whatever explanations you heard,
sheja pul chin tek gü la shen ché
Understanding whatever was to be known — this is how you came to define the nine yānas.
chö dang chö min shenjé long né dol
In the depths of your being, you could tell valid from invalid,
lé dré rang tsang zik la solwa deb
Thus perceiving the deceptive creations of karma: to you, we pray!

gyundré la dö zabsang tsal shyé né
Wanting to know the profound secret beyond karmic causality,
guru jé lé da ké damtsik nö
You received, from the Guru,14 the samayas beyond transgression.
ya lung ka dü chö kyi gyatso yi
In Yamalung,15 to ripen your mind-stream, he gave you
tokmar gyü min dzé la solwa deb
The Ocean of Dharma, Great Gathering of Transmitted Precepts:16 to you, we pray!

shyo tö ti dror jé dang lhenchik peb
By miraculous means, the two of you sped to Shotö Tidrö17
tsokkhang chenmor dechen mandal pul
Where, in the assembly hall, you offered the Guru the maṇḍala of great bliss.
sangwé wang shyi ku sung tuk su min
Thus you were granted the four secret empowerments, which matured in you the enlightened body,
speech and mind
lamé daknang jong la solwa deb
And refined your pure perception of the master: to you, we pray!

dawa druk tu wangdön tsal jangpé
Having cultivated for six months the empowerments received,
dü jor lung gak tendrel chunyi dang
At an auspicious time you halted your karmic winds, thus purifying the twelve links,18
nekab shyi dak chunyi sa chok nön
And four occasions,19 and seizing the supreme twelfth ground.20
samyé yönten den la solwa deb
Through this, you attained inconceivable qualities: to you, we pray!

gurü lung shyin balpö yul du jön
Following the Guru’s instructions you travelled to Nepal,
mi sé ro lang ser gyi rin shyal né
Brought a corpse back to life, were rewarded with gold
tab kyi pawo a tsar salé lü
And ransomed your consort of skilful means, Ācārya Salé.
dul ké dro mang tul la solwa deb
In such ways, you guided beings, so difficult to tame: to you, we pray!

ba su dha ra shakya dé ma sok
You exchanged teachings with Vasudhara,21 Śākyademā22 and others,
pentsün chö sen lar yang ti dror peb
And made your way back to Tidrö.
ga shyi tsal jang chü kyi ngödrub tob
You cultivated the four joys,23 attained the siddhi of the vital essence,24
jung ngar rangwang gyur la solwa de
And brought the five elements under your control: to you, we pray!

chögyal soltab yabyum chimpur peb
At the buddhist king’s request,25 you accompanied the Guru to Chimpu,
lamé kyilkhor gya dang nyishu yi
Where he disclosed a hundred and twenty peerless maṇḍalas
shyal ché kalden sumgya minpar dzé
And thereby matured three hundred fortunate disciples.
tuk drub ka chen bab la solwa deb
And so you received the heart practice of the enlightened mind: to you, we pray!

ti dror lama drubpé jin chen tob
Having accomplished the Guru practice at Tidrö, you received great blessings,
nangwa tamché lamé rolpar shar
And all appearances arose as the Guru’s great display.
orgyen khandrö ling sok shying chok drö
In visions you travelled to Uḍḍiyāna, land of the ḍākinīs, and to other lands supreme among
all realms.
ngotsar da chö zik la solwa deb
And so it was that you beheld marvellous signs: to you, we pray!

zegö lü ngak yi dang sangye ten
You practiced the austerities of food and clothing, of body, speech and mind, and the Buddha’s
teaching,
shyendön nyingjé kawa chenpo gyé
Bringing benefit to others and practicing compassion.
gurü kalung jishyin tarchin né
As prophesied by the Guru, you mastered these eight great challenges
sosö drubtak tön la solwa de
And displayed signs of accomplishment in every case: to you, we pray!

ya gang tsam su tummö dé drö nyé
On the Ya glacier26 when you accomplished the bliss and heat of tummo,27
palpé gödral rüpé gyen druk dzé
You needed no ordinary clothing, for the six bone ornaments were your adornments.
sengé dzong du men gyi chü lönpé
In Sengé Dzong, you extracted the essence of medicinal herbs as your sustenance,
drangsong men lhé chö la solwa deb
And you were worshipped by all the masters and deities of healing: to you, we pray!

dö ché lü zé jalü khachö nyé
Dissolving into rainbow body as you entered the realm of Vajravārāhī,
ngak ni tsang yang yenlak drukchu dzok
Your speech was perfectly endowed with sixty melodious tones,
sem la dorjé tabü tingdzin den
And your mind immersed in the vajra-like samādhi,
choktün ngödrub nyé la solwa deb
You who attained all the supreme and ordinary siddhis: to you, we pray!

né ring dzong du mi dang mi min gyi
At Nering Dzong,28 there were hordes of humans and other beings.
pungtsok tul né depé shyi la kö
You subdued them all, causing great faith to spark and grow within them.
tuchen lha dré nam kyi song nying pul
Powerful gods and demons offered you their life-force
tenpé sungmar kö la solwa deb
And you appointed them as guardians of the teachings: to you, we pray!

pa dro tak tsang zablam tulshyuk chö
At Paro Taktsang,29 you adopted the yogic discipline of the profound path,
go sum dechen dorjé sum du gyur
Transforming your three doors30 into the three vajras of supreme bliss.
chudruk langtsö gekpé zidang bar
You shone, then, mesmerising as a sixteen-year-old maiden.
palmo heruka la solwa de
Courageous heruka goddess: to you we pray!

tsepakmé pé wangkur lungten tob
Amitāyus bestowed on you empowerments and prophecies,
dré gü mi nga tsé yi rigdzin nyé
Through which you attained the vidyādhara level of immortality, beyond the reach of death and
decline.
tayé kyilkhor kün gyi tsomor gyur
You became the principal goddess of every limitless maṇḍala,
tsedak ting öbar mar solwa deb
Blazing dark blue lady of longevity: to you we pray!31

mönmo tashi khyé'u dren jesu zung
Having accepted Tashi Kyidren of Mön as your disciple,32
ö pu tak tsang dorjé purpa drub
Together with the Guru you practiced Vajrakīla in Öpu Taktsang,33
tongsum lha dré kün gyi soknying lön
Seizing the life force of all the gods and demons of the three-thousand-fold universe.
yingchuk tsokjé ma la solwa deb
Dhātviśvarī, Mother of All-Encompassing Space: to you we pray!

lokpé bön nam dzutrul nüpé chom
By means of wondrous magic you defeated the evil bönpos,
dik lön mangpö lé ngen kyé gyün ché
And put a stop to the actions of the wicked ministers there.
gendün yen sel tab dang tukjé tul
You healed the discord in the Saṅgha, guiding with skill and compassion,
gyalten nyinmor dzé la solwa deb
Allowing the teachings of the Victorious One to shine like the sun: to you, we pray!

kha rak gang dang tsang gi jomo nang
At the Karak glacier, at Jomonang in Tsang,
ukpa lung du nyengyü kagyü pel
And in the valley of Ukpalung, you spread the lineage oral instructions.
lechen mi dün drubtob ngabgya sok
By this means, seven fortunate ones were matured and liberated,
mindrol pakmé dzé la solwa deb
And likewise five hundred siddhas, and many more besides: to you, we pray!

shampo gang su jakpa mi dün la
At the Shampo glacier34 you introduced seven bandits
ngo tré drub nyé orgyen yul du tang
To the nature of mind, and sent them on to Uḍḍiyāna.35
balyul khandro kala siddhi ma
In Nepal you took the Ḍākinī Kālasiddhī under your care
jezung dampé drol la solwa deb
And granted her liberating instructions: to you, we pray!

chimpur guru jé dang lhenchik tu
Together with the Guru, you stayed again at Chimpu,
lo drang chuchik shyuk né tuk kyi dzö
Where for eleven years he bestowed upon you all his heart treasures,
lhakmé bumpa gang jö tsul du shyé
With nothing omitted, as if filling a vase.
shedrub tenpa pel la solwa deb
And so you spread both theory and practice far and wide: to you, we pray!

tuk drub jewa nyingtik tritrak kor
Millions of heart practices, ten thousands of heart essence cycles,
gyülung mengak zab ching gyaché chö
Teachings vast and profound, tantra, scriptures and pith instructions —36
shok ser ngö su dayik dumar kö
You codified them all in symbolic scripts on yellow scrolls,
zabter cha shyi drik la solwa deb
And, with this, you laid the foundation of the profound terma treasures: to you, we pray!

yabyum drub rik lhenchik ütsang kham
Together with the Guru and accomplished fellow practitioners, you travelled in a group to Ü,
Tsang and Kham.37
shyab kyi chak né drubpé jin gyi lab
Together, you left footprints and blessed the land through your practice,
sawo ter gyi kang né kha jang shyak
You concealed terma treasures in the earth, left accounts,
lechen lungten dzé la solwa deb
And prophesied their revelation by those with appropriate karma: to you, we pray!

guru sin yul pebpé kyelmé lam
You accompanied your Guru as he left for the land of the rakṣasas.38
tsa shö rong du ati khyabdal ché
You were there at Tsashö Rong39 when he revealed the Atiyoga teachings,
dampa yongdzok lungten tartuk dang
Perfect, all-encompassing in their entirety,
dé jé nam sum tob la solwa deb
And you received his three testaments and final prophecies: to you, we pray!

shang dang zab bur shyuk né kalden nam
You stayed awhile in Shang and Zabu, maturing and liberating fortunate disciples.
mindrol sar kö ati gongpa la
There, resting evenly in the wisdom expanse of Ati,
nyampar shyakpé rigpa tsé la peb
Your awareness expanded to full maturity.40
shyingkham drukchur nyul la solwa deb
This is how you visited sixty pure realms: to you, we pray!

dü lön shanti nyalwé né né drang
You visited the hells and rescued the evil minister Śantipa,
zegö men nor lü sok kyab jin sok
Giving food, clothes, medicine, jewels, and protection both physically and mentally.
dakshyen jewé dzepa ngotsar bé
You performed amazing deeds of exchanging yourself with others,
lha lü wangpö tü la solwa deb
And thus you were venerated by gods and nāgas: to you, we pray!

chimpur lhasé gyalpö chöné dzé
At Chimpu, in Tibet, you acted as an adviser to the King.41
böyul gurü jesu drang tsé kyi
You became the source of instructions to all the followers of the Guru.
dampé khung gyur chö gyü dzamling khyab
Your teachings spread far and wide throughout the world,
dro dön namkha nyam la solwa deb
Bringing benefit to beings as far as space pervades: to you, we pray!

böyul ta ü küntu drubpa dzé
The whole of Tibet was benefited by your grace.
chak shyabjé dang yikdru ku ten kö
Leaving hand- and footprints, syllables and images of deities,
ma ong dé gü denpé kyendro kün
You brought benefit to everyone connected with you,
dreltsé dönden dzé la solwa de
Including all those in the future with faith and devotion: to you, we pray!

né chen gya tsa né tren jewa dün
You journeyed to great numbers of sacred sites, one hundred major and seven million minor,
gangri nyernga dzong chen chobgyé dang
Twenty-five glaciers, eighteen major regions,
bé yul chunyi ngotsar né chok dün
Twelve hidden valleys, seven spectacular places,
sangwé né ngar shek la solwa deb
And seven supremely secret sites: to you, we pray!

dedak nam su chö nor damdzé kyi
In these places, under seal, you hid countless terma caskets
terkha drangmé bé shing ter shyab dam
With teachings, precious objects, and samaya substances.
mönlam shipa jöpé dü küntu
Uttering aspirations and verses of auspiciousness,
gelek gyepar dzé la solwa deb
You ensured the rise of excellence and virtue forever: to you, we pray!

kar chung dorjé ying kyi tsuklak tu
By giving teachings at the temple of Karchu Dorje Ying,
lhasé ché tsö kalden checham nam
The vast and profound Three Gatherings42 and others,
düpa korsum lasok zabgyé kyi
You matured and liberated fortunate sons and daughters,
chögö mindrol dzé la solwa deb
The prince foremost among them: to you, we pray!

sangdü drub tsé guru ngö su jön
As you practiced the Gathering of Secrets,43 the Guru appeared to you
shyakdün shyuk né lhasé mindrol dzé
And stayed for seven days, maturing and liberating the prince.44
gongpa rangdrol lasok ngönmé kyi
Thus with compassion you bestowed the first profound instructions
dam zab tukjé tsal la solwa deb
Of the Naturally Liberated Wisdom:45 to you, we pray!

khar chur peb né gongpar nyam shyakpé
You journeyed to Karchu,46 where in meditative equipoise
chönyi zepé nangwa ngön du gyur
You actualized the dissolution of experience into its nature.47
rik druk né su gang dul trulpa yi
Sending forth your emanations as guides throughout the six realms,
khorwa dong né truk la solwa deb
And you dredged saṃsāra from its depths: to you, we pray!

pakpé yul né mendara ba jön
Mandāravā came from the holy land of India.
damngak ga dar chö kyi drowar dzé
And together you discussed the Dharma, compared pith instructions,
pentsün chö sen ngak jö metok tor
And exchanged teachings with one another, amid garlands of praise.
shipé yang nyen pel la solwa deb
Such was the delightful melody of auspiciousness: to you, we pray!

lar yang shang kyi zab bu lung du jön
You returned to the valley of Zabu in Shang,
tsokkhor cher dzé tsa lob chuchikpa
Where you performed a great feast48 with your eleven heart disciples,49
nyengyü marwa nying dré mengak ni
And granted hundreds of pith instructions —
gya tsa nangwar dzé la solwa deb
The beating heart of the oral lineage: to you, we pray!

leden sosö solwa tabpa lé
Responding to the heartfelt prayers of your disciples,
shyaldam lungten chi tsik labja tsal
You gave prophecies, instructions, and words of advice.
yong dril gunglo nyigya chuchik tu
You remained for two hundred and eleven years
böyul dulja kyang la solwa deb
To protect and be a guide for Tibetans: to you, we pray!

jadé tsé gyé né sum khandro dang
On the eighth day of the bird month, ḍākinīs of the three worlds
ngayab sinpo dé gyé suwa leb
And rakṣasas of all eight classes came from Cāmara to greet you.
bö kham lhami shyu len gu kor dang
You granted nine requests made by gods and humans
chegur lungten nang la solwa deb
And gave prophecies of nine great events: to you, we pray!

mön bal khandro tukké yé yön dü
You gathered the two ḍākinīs from Bhutan and Nepal into your heart centre, one on either side.50
tsé chur khandro dé shyi tekpa yi
And on the tenth day, within an aura of light,
ö kyi do ler ö kyi gongbur shyuk
Borne by four ḍākinīs on a palanquin of light rays,
tsewé shyal chem tsal la solwa deb
You lovingly gave your final testament: to you, we pray!

ngowo shyönnu bumkur ngönjang chub
In essence you actualized full awakening, the youthful vase body was yours.
nampa ngayab pema ö du jön
In appearance you journeyed to the Palace of Lotus Light,51
khandro ting öbar mé tsul zung né
In the form of the ḍākinī Blazing Blue Light,52
sin gyal zung ma dzé la solwa deb
There to rule the rakṣasas as their queen: to you, we pray!

gang gi ku sung tuk yön trinlé ni
Your enlightened body, speech, and mind, and all your enlightened qualities and activities,
guru jé dang nyampa nyi gyur né
Are inseparable from those of your master and Guru.
namkhé gar khyab mi zé gyen khor ngé
And these five inexhaustible aspects reach wherever space extends,
khyab ching dro dön dzé la solwa deb
Bringing benefit to beings: to you, we pray!

khyepar böyul dro la jé tsewé
On account of your love for the people of Tibet,
namtrul nyerngé tsor dzé dü taktu
You appeared to them in twenty-five primary manifestations; and at all times you send
gyün mi chepar trul dang yangtrul sok
An uninterrupted stream of perfect emanations
gang la gang dul tön la solwa deb
As guides and teachers for all sentient beings: to you, we pray!

lechen nam la panglang lung tsal shying
To us, your disciples, you offer friendly counsel on what we should adopt and avoid.
barché sel dang ngödrub tsolwa yi
You dispel any obstacles and you grant us siddhis.
dongdrok dzé sok bö kham tak kyongwé
In these and  other ways you are always our guardian,
ma chik drinmo ché la solwa deb
Tibet’s one true Mother, peerless and kind: to you, we pray.

gongpa zabmo namkha nyampar khyab
Your profound wisdom-mind pervades the whole of space,
tukjé nyimé kyilkhor lé lhak sal
Your compassion shines more brightly than the sun,
jinlab trin dang ngödrub drang char lé
A sweet rain of siddhis falls from the clouds of your blessings.
nyurwé yum chenmo la solwa deb
Great mother of swift enlightened action: to you we pray!

dé ching güpé solwa tabpé tü
Through the power of our prayer to you, our faith and devotion,
drimé yeshe chen gyi rab zik la
You gaze upon us with the eyes of primordial wisdom.53
tukjé chakkyü nyurdu zung né kyang
Swiftly seize and bind us us with your hook of compassion
khachö dakpé shying du drenpar dzö
And lead us to Khecara, the pure land of the ḍākinīs.

kyé dang tserab küntu tukjé zung
Hold us, in this life and all our lives to come,
dü dang nampa küntu jingyi lob
And in your compassion grant us your blessing
di dang tendu dak gi lama dzö
Now and forever, be our teacher
chok dang tünmong ngödrub malü tsol
And grant us every siddhi, common and supreme!

kunzang pejung yabyum chindrawa
Exactly as they are, the excellent Padmākara and his consort,
dendra khonar dak kyang nyur drub té
May we swiftly, all of us, become just like them!
namtar gyalwa kün dang yermé pé
Through your life and liberation, inseparable from the victorious ones,
khanyam dro kün sangye sar gö shok
May each and every being, as far as space pervades, be established on the level of buddhahood!

According to the judicious command of the glorious master, Padma Ösal Dongak Lingpa54 and the
repeated urging of that queen among yoginīs, the great Doshul Khandro,55 I, the Kusāli Padma
Garwang Lodrö Thayé,56 with one-pointed faith in the Guru and consort inseparably united,
at Kunzang Dechen Ösal Ling within the sacred site of Śrī Devīkoṭa,57 at the beginning
of the Water Snake year, on the tenth day of the waxing moon58 within the miracle month,59
have distilled the meaning of the life and liberation of Khandro Yeshé Tsogyal, as revealed
in a terma by the great treasure-revealer Samten Lingpa.60

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2017. (Translated by Stefan Mang with reference to Padmakara’s
translation of Yeshé Tsogyal’s life and liberation and Richard Barron’s translation of the
same prayer.61 Edited by Libby Hogg.)
↑ The tambura is a long-necked, plucked string instrument found in various forms in Indian music.
It does not play melody but rather supports and sustains the melody of another instrument
or singer by providing a continuous harmonic bourdon or drone.↑ Dharmodgata is the name
of a previous Buddha. This line describes how Tārā, the female bodhisattva of compassion,
first generated bodhicitta and thus took the vow to attain buddhahood for the sake of
all sentient beings. See: Patrul Rinpoche, The Words of My Perfect Teacher, translated by
Padmakara Translation Group (Boston: Shambala, 1998), 153-157.↑ During the time of Buddha
Śākyamuni, Yeshé Tsogyal took birth as Gaṅgādevī, who made a compilation of the Buddha’s teachings.↑
The Saṃbhogakāya buddhafields.↑ The syllable evaṃ.↑ The five major sciences (Tib.
rig gnas chen po lnga) are: craftsmanship, logic, grammar, medicine and the 'Inner science'
or Dharma.↑ The caves at Samyé Chimphu represent Guru Rinpoche’s enlightened speech.
He spent long periods there in retreat. The caves are located at the head of the valley that
runs parallel and to the northeast of the Samyé Valley, about 13 km from Samyé.↑ The teachings
of the Great Perfection.↑ Guru Rinpoche declined the first request of King Trisong
Detsen to teach the Secret Mantrayāna, explaining that the time was not yet ripe. The king
then made a second offering (see next verse) and Guru Rinpoche accepted.↑ A gaṇacakra feast.↑
The object of veneration of verses 8 and 9 is Guru Rinpoche.↑ The three collections
or 'baskets' (Skt. tripiṭaka; Tib. sde snod gsum) are the Vinaya, Sūtra and Abhidharma. Together
these comprise the Dharma of transmission or scripture.↑ The Hinayāna and the Mahāyāna.↑
Jamgön Kongtrul Rinpoche refers throughout the rest of the prayer to Guru Padmasambhava
simply as ‘the Guru'.↑ Drakmar Yamalung, ‘Red Rock Cave at Yamalung’, is a sacred mountain
hermitage, located in the hills high above the head of the Samyé valley. Drakmar Yamalung
was one of  Guru Rinpoche’s eight principal retreat places. It was in Yamalung and Samye
Chimpu that Guru Rinpoche first began to teach Yeshé Tsogyal the Dharma.↑ The Ocean of
Dharma, the Great Gathering of Transmitted Precepts (Tib. bka' 'dus chos kyi rgya mtsho)
is a teaching cycle that focuses on the Kagyé deities. It was discovered as a terma-treasure
by Orgyen Lingpa, who was the author of the Padma Kathang, and it was subsequently rediscovered
as a Yangter by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo. The Yarlung Valley is situated in Nedong
in the Lhokha Prefecture. Yarlung Sheldrak are the caves representing Guru Rinpoche’s enlightened
qualities. It was in these caves that Yeshé Tsogyal was initiated into The Ocean
of Dharma, the Great Gathering of Transmitted Precepts. It was also in these caves that Orgyen
Lingpa discovered the Padma Kathang, The Chronicles of Padma, the most famous biography
of Guru Rinpoche.↑ The cave of Shyotö Tidrö, also known as Kiri Yongdzong, is one of the
retreat places where Guru Rinpoche stayed long-term with Yeshe Tsogyal. It is situated high
in the cliffs of a pair of mountains with hot springs, at an altitude of 5,400m. It was
here that Guru Rinpoche later transmitted the entire teachings of Dzogpachenpo, the Innermost,
Unsurpassed Cycle of the Category of Pith Instructions, and the Khandro Nyingtik to
a hundred thousand wisdom ḍākinīs and a single human disciple, Yeshé Tsogyal.↑ The twelve
links of dependent origination.↑ These four occasions are: 1. waking life, 2. dream, 3. deep
sleep, and 4. sexual union.↑ The twelfth ground refers to the very last moment before
attaining buddhahood according to the teachings of the Tantra.↑ Vasudhara, a student of Guru
Rinpoche, was a great scholar from the Kathmandu valley.  He later helped translate the
Sūtras and Tantras from Sanskrit into Tibetan.↑ Śākyademā, more commonly known as Śākyadevī,
was Guru Rinpoche’s Nepali consort, who stayed behind in Nepal when Guru Rinpoche left
to go to Tibet↑ The four joys (Skt. catvārimuditā; Tib. dga' ba bzhi) are four increasingly
subtle experiences of bliss-emptiness connected with the advanced practices of tsa-lung.
They transcend ordinary feelings of joy or pleasure. They are: 1. joy, 2. supreme joy, 3.
special joy and, 4. innate joy.↑ Yeshé Tsogyal could pass through any kind of material object,
and her body was no longer subject to the phenomena of ageing, sickness, and death.↑
Trisong Detsen↑ Located in the snowy mountains above Shyotö Tidrö.↑ Tummo (Tib. gtum mo),
or chandali (Skt. caṇḍāli) is the practice of ‘inner heat’, one of the Six Yogas of Naropa.↑
Nering Dzong is the same as Sengé Dzong. Its full name is Nering Sengé Dzong.↑ Paro Taktsang,
since the early centuries of the second millennium, has been one of the most important
pilgrimage places in Bhutan, famous for having been used for retreat by Guru Rinpoche.↑
The three doors (Tib. sgo gsum) are the body, speech and mind.↑ ‘Blazing dark blue lady
of longevity’ is the name given by Amitāyus to Yeshé Tsogyal when she attained the level
of the vidyādhara of immortality.↑ Tashi Kyidren came to meet Yeshé Tsogyal while the latter
was practising at Sengé Dzong. It was at that time that Tashi Kyidren became Yeshé Tsogyal’s
disciple. Later, when Yeshé Tsogyal left Tibet, as recounted in this verse, the two
women travelled together to Önphu Taktsang, where Yeshé Tsogyal introduced Tashi Kyidren
to Guru Rinpoche.↑ Önphu Taktsang, is another important retreat place relating to Guru Rinpoche,
located in the mountains above Samyé monastery.↑ The massif and glacier of Yarlha Shampo
rises, like a great snow fortress, to the south of Yarlung Valley. Its central glacier,
rising to a height of 6761 m, is one of the four great snow mountains of Tibet, and is
named after the resident local spirit Yarlha Shampo.↑ As the result of the teachings given
to them by Yeshé Tsogyal, these seven bandits became mahāsiddhas, who travelled to Uḍḍiyāna
and brought benefit to many beings there.↑ Here, Tantra refers to the Mahāyoga, Scripture
to the Anuyoga, and Pith Instructions to the Atiyoga teachings.↑ Central, southern, and
eastern Tibet↑ Yeshé Tsogyal flew with Guru Rinpoché in the direction of the land of the
rakṣasas. They landed in the area of Tsashö Rong and remained there for three weeks. It was
here that Guru Rinpoché granted Yeshé Tsogyal special Dzogchen instructions.↑ Present day
district of Nuwakot, about 65 km north-west of Kathmandu. Tibetans used to refer to the
valley as Tsawatshashö or Tsawarong, ‘the hot valley’, since the climate of the valley there
was similar to that of India, and temperatures equally warm.↑ The third of the four visions
of Tögal.↑ The son of King Tri Songdetsen, King Mutri Tsenpo.↑ The Three Gatherings,
the Düpa Khor Sum (Tib. ‘dus pa skor gsum) are: 1. the Lama Kasang Düpa (Tib. bla ma bka’
gsang ‘dus pa), 2. the Yidam Gongpa Düpa (Tib. yi dam dgongs pa ‘dus pa) and, 3. the Dzogchen
Ati Düpa (Tib. rdzogs chen a ti ‘dus pa).↑ The Gathering of Secrets, (Tib. bla ma gsang
'dus) is a revelation made by Guru Chöwang (1212-1270).↑ Yeshé Tsogyal opened the maṇḍala
of the Gathering of Secrets with seven worthy disciples in attendance, including the princes
Mutri Tsenpo and Murum Tsenpo, and the queen Ngangchung Pel. ‘The prince’ here refers
to prince Mutri Tsenpo in particular.↑ The Zabchö Shitro Gongpa Rangdrol (Tib. zab chos
zhi khro dgongs pa rang grol), 'The Peaceful and Wrathful Deities, The Profound Dharma of
Naturally Liberated Wisdom', is a cycle of terma teachings revealing the bardo teachings and
instructions of the Nyingma tradition. They were revealed in the 14th century by the great
tertön Karma Lingpa. The cycle contains the famous Bardo Tödrol Chenmo, the so-called
Tibetan Book of the Dead.↑ The caves at Lhodrak Karchu are the representation of Guru Rinpoche’s
enlightened mind. The caves are located in Lhodrak County, just below Karchu, north
of the Bhutanese border, cradled at the convergence of two rivers, the Kuru-chu and Tamzhol-chu.↑
The fourth of the four visions of Tögal.↑ A great gaṇacakra feast.↑ These were: 1.
Yeshe Nyingpo, 2. Ma Rinchen Chok, 3. Odren Pelgyi Zhonnu, 4. Langlab Gyalwa Changchub Dorje,
5. Dacha Dorje Pawo, 6. Surya Thangwa of U, 7. Trashi Chidren of Mon, 8. the Newar Kālasiddhī,
9. Changchub Drolma from Li, 10. Shelkar Dorje Tsomo, and 11. Kharchen Zhonnu Drolma.↑
“Yeshé Tsogyal touched Tashi Kyidren, the girl from Mön. Instantly, she was transformed
into a blue utpala lotus with eight petals and marked with the syllables hūṃ and phaṭ
and instantly she dissolved into the right side of the Lady's heart. Then with her left
hand, Yeshé Tsogyal touched Kālasiddhī of Nepal, who changed into a red lotus of sixteen petals
marked with the sixteen vowels and hrīḥ ,and then dissolved into the left side of her
heart.” Gyalwa Changchub and Namkhai Nyingpo, Lady of the Lotus-Born: The Life and Enlightenment
of Yeshe Tsogyal, (Boston: Shambala, 2002), 197-198.↑ On Cāmara(dvīpa), on the peak
of a mountain shaped like a heart, there lies a resplendent and magnificent fortress of
awakened perfection. This is the famed palace of Padma Ö, Lotus Light, the abode of the great
Mahāguru Padmasambhava.↑ The ḍākinī Blazing Blue Light, Ting Ö Barma (Tib. mthing ‘od
‘bar ma), is an emanation of Yeshé Tsogyal and the consort of Guru Rinpoche in the palace
of Lotus Light,  where he resides as Rakṣa Tötreng.↑ Lit. You gaze upon us with the unstained
eyes of primordial wisdom.↑ Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo (1820–1892)↑ A great and influential
female practitioner of the 19th century, from the Kham region of Tibet.↑ Jamgön Kongtrul
Lodrö Tayé (1813–1899)↑ The Kagyüpas consider Tsari in Tibet to be identical with Śrī Devīkoṭa,
one of the twenty-four sacred ḍākinī sites of India that are referenced in the Cakrasaṃvara
tantra. Blessed by Guru Rinpoche and Viamlamitra, Tsari is a small region that
lies between the southern province of Dakpo and the Indian border.↑ On Guru Rinpoche Day,
Saturday 25th February 1893.↑ The Buddha displayed many miracles during the first half of
the first lunar month, in order to increase the merit and devotion of future disciples. Accordingly,
this period was called Chotrul Dawa, the miracle month, and it marks the first
two weeks of every year according to the Tibetan calendar. According to the Western calendar,
depending on the year, this usually falls within the months of February and March.↑ Taksham
Nüden Dorje (Tib. stag sham nus ldan rdo rje), aka Samten Lingpa (1655–1708), was a
famed Nyingma master from Kham who had settled in the kingdom of Powo and discovered many
hidden termas there. A tertön himself, Taksham Nüden Dorje was the reincarnation of Ācārya
Salé, one of the consorts and disciples of Yeshe Tsogyal. It was he who revealed the biography
of Yeshe Tsogyal entitled The Lute Song of the Gandharvas: A Revelation in Eight Chapters
of the Secret History of the Life and Enlightenment of Yeshe Tsogyal, Queen of Tibet
(Tib. bod kyi jo mo ye shes mtsho rgyal gyi mdzad tshul rnam par thar pa gab pa mngon phyung
rgyud mang dri za’i glu phreng bzhugs so, jo mo’i rnam thar skabs don brgyad pa). Translated
into English by the Padmakara Translation Group, see: Gyalwa Changchub and Namkhai
Nyingpo. Lady of the Lotus-Born: The Life and Enlightenment of Yeshe Tsogyal. Translated by
the Padmakara Translation Group. Boston: Shambala, 2002↑ Nyoshul Khen Rinpoche, A Marvelous
Garland of Rare Gems, translated by Richard Barron (Junction City: Padma Publishing, 2005),
61–69.